The reason I was asking about the languages is if you're able to just introduce yourself with your name
and where and when you were born in English and also in another one of your languages.
I don't know where my language will come in there.
My name is Cordelia Ukusogwu.
I am Onora. That is my father's name, Onora.
And then my husband is Ukusogwu.
So that's the name.
I'm from Nigeria, the eastern part of Nigeria.
And from the region of the, I call Anambra state,
and from the area of the Igbo-speaking dialects.
And when were you born?
I was born on the 22nd of November 1944.
I was born as twins, identical twins.
And both of us as Haido, we grew up and...
Are you able to say just your name and where you were born in the dialect?
In one of your dialects?
In my dialect?
Yeah.
Where I was born?
Yes, and your name and where you were born.
My name is Cordelia Ukusogwu.
I was born in Omisha.
I speak in English.
You still speak in English.
Sorry, I shouldn't speak in English.
No, just the introduction.
The introduction?
Yeah, just so you know.
Okay.
Well, I'm from Cordelia Ukusogwu.
I'm born the year 22nd November 1944.
Thank you.
And then of course, born in Anambra in Nigeria,
which is part of Africa, West Africa, in the Commonwealth,
one of the Commonwealth nations.
Do you remember the area that you grew up in?
Do you remember that area that you grew up in?
Oh yeah, of course.
What was it like growing up there?
Well, my town is a cosmopolitan town, well populated and quite civilised.
And then it's quite a busy town and it contains one of the largest markets in West Africa.
Yeah, and that is the Omisha market.
Omisha market is quite near.
And the town is situated at the bank of the River Niger,
where of course we have much of this Monk Park and the rest where they actually lived.
And even as of now, we still have that history of where they lived and how they operated
and what they installed in my town, especially missionaries, the Irish missionaries,
especially the Catholic and the Protestants.
Did you used to visit that as a child? Did you used to visit the coast and the waters?
Oh yeah, yeah, yeah. Of course, my mother was a big trader and she was trading in fish,
fish smoking and then she was doing the fish trading, a trader with the fishermen.
And I used to go to get the fish and everything.
And then my mum had a stall where she normally sells fish. So I know the area very well.
What other things did you do as a child? What ages as well were you talking?
Oh, the age. Well, I will say I grew up in my town.
By the time I started going to school, in primary school, my senior sister got married and then took me with her.
So I had to go to another state to live with her. So I wasn't living with my mum and dad.
I was living with my senior sister and I was schooling as well in another state, which is not my own state.
But I schooled partially as kindergarten and nursery and primary a little bit halfway.
Primary before I left my hometown to stay in another town with my sister.
And then I continued my schooling and then later on I came back home to stay with my mum and dad.
My dad was a big fowl. Well, before I was born, my dad was a blacksmith in the town called Fokadous,
which is the French speaking area in the boat industry.
That's where he was a blacksmith in the boat industry in Fokadous.
And I don't know what his name is. It's one of the French countries. I don't know. I'll change his name by now.
So at that time I wasn't born, but when my dad retired from that, he came home and became a farmer and a hunter.
A farmer and hunter back home. And he was quite good with his farming.
And then eventually as a hunter, he killed a lion. And then because of that, he was hailed a hero.
A big hero back home of a hunter killing a lion and everything.
So it was when we grew up that, you know, come to know that.
And apparently if you check with the year I was born, it was almost as post-World War II.
I think 1944, post World War II. That was when I was born.
So that's why I said, you know, I can remember that vividly.
And then I was called and my mom had so many of us, you know, because we were separated.
So I lived with my sister and then when I finished living with my sister, I lived with my aunt, my mother's sister's daughter.
And I lived with her as well. So I didn't grow completely from, you know, from childhood to whatever age.
But I was very close to my mom. So I lived with my aunt.
And then later on I came back home. Then it was when I came back home.
Then I finished my primary school. So I started to go into modern school.
We had modern school then. It's a secondary school.
At the beginning of secondary school, but we call it secondary modern school.
Yeah, so I did that. After that, then I went into nursing.
Okay.
My nursing career.
How old were you when you went into nursing?
I was about fifteen or sixteen. I went into nursing.
So what was your favorite memory of your childhood?
Well, favorite memory of my childhood because I wasn't living in a sport.
I was living with my sister and then with my auntie and then with my mom and dad.
And then before I left, I went to my nursing education, which I left home.
Because you have to be in a boarding school.
Yeah.
So my life as a child is so divided in that segment.
So I wouldn't recall to say this is the time yet. But I lived here, lived here, lived here.
So you wouldn't necessarily pick up moments in there that you would say is your favorite or most enjoyable?
Yeah, but I enjoyed my life, my time back home.
And I had a grandmother who was a staff member and supported me.
And then before I left home, finally.
So what do you think about that childhood and that upbringing?
Is there one or two events that stick inside your mind or is there more in terms of just something special that might have happened?
Well, I wouldn't say because at that time, you know, young girls' children, you know, you help your mom to help.
So my mom was still having children then.
You help your mom to look after the baby and babies and everything and help out, you know, in sending messages, you know, that you can be able to cope with with your age.
So I wouldn't say it was and I would say because I lived with my aunt and it was helping them when they have children.
So I was there as a sort of assisting them, you know, like, instead of the.
I don't know how to go about it.
I won't say it's a nursery, but it's like somebody living with her senior sister and helping her out in helping with the baby, carrying the little ones.
And then, you know, sort of assisting the family child care.
Yeah, family child care.
I enjoyed that so much.
And yeah, I would like to know about what it was like with your father after the lion as well.
What was that? Did that change after you gained that status?
Well, he did, because in my town, heroes are always welcome and they have a group of heroes.
So every year they celebrate their heroism.
And they, you know, they wear regalia like, you know, that lion and then they do all their ceremonies, dancing, drumming and dancing.
So we used to enjoy that.
And then my father being a big hunter, we enjoyed them.
Every day he goes out, he brings back, you know, where the beds are, you know, the beds are short.
And then we both hunt us using feeding their families, you know.
So I enjoyed it.
And then my father was quite a materialist person.
I mean, he's, you know, he's what he does.
And both from your father there and your mother, was there certain kind of values they were teaching you as well
that you carry now too?
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.
My mom was a businesswoman.
Businesswoman in the sense that, you know, in the moneys she helps us out, sort us out to go to school.
And then when we come back from school, my mom is in the market, in her shed where she's selling her goose.
So we, sometimes we go to the market, you know, help her out and then come back to the house, to the home.
And we help our mom so much, you know.
All of us are very close.
And the way my mom brought the girls up is the way she brought the boys' house passports.
Yeah, yeah.
So we grew up as...
And fortunately, my mom was the second wife, not the first wife, because my dad had the first wife.
And then, you know, those days polygamy was, you know, quite polygamy in the sense of people marrying more than one wife.
My father was the only son of his parents.
So they said, well, because he's the first son, so he married.
And then the first wife only had two or three children.
They said, no, you know, because he's a big farmer, he has to have children to help him, you know, in the farm.
So he married my mom.
The first wife had about three children, but my mom had twelve.
Twelve children.
So in those days, children matters a lot in those days, because they are the core of the family.
The core is they help out in the farm, they help out in all the house responsibilities and cause of care.
So how was that explained to you as well in terms of the multiple mothers too, with your father and then obviously your sisters, your brothers and sisters?
Was that ever explained to you when you were younger?
I think when we were growing up, we were living...
First we were living in our own house.
My mom has her own room.
The first wife had her own room.
My dad had his own room.
And there's a common place in the house.
So it's a polygamous one, but you never know.
But the other children, by the time we grew up, the children of the first wife, they have already grown and they have married.
And then they are the first two.
My mother was more of the one taking care of my dad, looking after why the first wife is on her own, because her children has left home.
So we were the younger ones in the family.
Because my mother had more.
When you think you can't, you think it's only my mom that is the mother of the family, because we are more in the family than the other one.
So we grew up together, in terms of like old siblings.
But there was no differentiation of, oh, you're not the son.
It was so harmoniously.
And then from that and growing up, how did you come into the UK?
Yeah, my coming to the UK was when I finished my nursing.
I finished my nursing career with midwifery and nursing.
And I've been working, even during the war in my country, that three years, I was working as a nurse during that wartime.
And it was really hectic. And I was working more in the war front.
Yeah, because there was a hospital that we were based.
So we are treating wounded soldiers and taking care of, you know,
wounded soldiers. And then, of course, we have our, you know, war effects, you know, where we have to go to the bunker when there is attack and everything.
We stay in the bunker. So then we take our patients into the bunkers and we take them out when there is no attack.
We're nursing the patients there, the soldiers.
What year was this and how old were you as well?
I finished my nursing and midwifery because that was 1960, end of 66 to 67. That was when the war started.
So like 23?
Yeah, about 27 years. And then the war finished in three years.
Okay.
And then my two brothers were here in the UK. Then my senior brothers, they were here from my own mom. They were already here.
So when one of them had children and their children, once they have their children, they send them back home.
And, you know, they were looked after back home. So during the war, they lived with me where I was working during the war for their own safety,
for the safety of the children. So I took care of them. And then during the war, we had some, you know, we called them characters.
You know, these international aid workers. They supply food and then we distribute.
And I was, as a midwife then, I was taking care of them. I was doing much of child and health, mother and child health care.
You know, as a midwife, you know, giving vaccinations, treating children, babies and their mothers, pregnant mothers and everything.
So during that time, those children, I was able to send them back to their parents here through the characters, the characters international aid organization.
So that was, the war ended. So when the war ended, I said to my mom and my brothers that are here that I want to come over
to at least to sort of get relief from the effect of the war and for me to improve my work and continue to pursue my nursing career as well.
As soon as I came here, I did that as well.
What expectations do you have of the UK?
Of coming.
And where was it? Where was your first place you came to the UK?
I came to the UK and in London. I lived in London with my brother, my single brother.
Because that's where I, you know, because he was the one that invited me to come. So I came, I lived with him and the family.
And that was in East London. East London, yeah, Matonstone.
What were your expectations on London before you came?
Unfortunately, I came at the time when it was real winter.
Did you know it was going to be winter?
I know, I know. I came when it was really bad. I came with Lufthansa, is it Lufthansa flight and I landed in the bedroom.
And I didn't know a thing. Fortunately, my brother and his wife, they were at work.
So they told me to call them when I get to the airport. So at the airport, I gave them the number and then they called them.
I spoke to them that I'm now in Heathrow. So they said I should wait there. When they finished work, they would come down to collect me.
So that was how I got myself. So I had people to take care of me when I came in. My brother and wife. And I lived with them.
But it was really cold.
Then my brother was, they were living in Lettuce and they say the hospital was very close to where they lived.
So I just walked to the hospital to say I'm a nurse. I'm a registered nurse back home. I'm a midwife.
So they said, okay, they will take me as a nurse. They will take me as a carer, care assistant. I said, okay, that is the rule.
So I was taken as a carer. And then from the way I was doing my work as a professional qualified, they saw I was really quite good in what I'm doing.
So there were things that, for example, when the doctors or nurses are working, I always like to be there with them.
And then I will ask questions. Especially during doctor's rounds. And they will ask questions. And then the students, they will know it.
And then they will say, has anybody got an idea? And I will raise my hand up and I will answer.
And then they say, did you say this is a care assistant? And that was how I managed it.
They gave me some very tricky assignments to do. Taking the temperature, doing blood pressure, doing all those things that nurses do.
And I was recruited as a care assistant. So when I did all this, they felt, especially the doctors, they felt, oh no, this is somebody that knows what she's doing.
So they were the ones that helped me out. The organization, the hospital. Then they sent my name to the NMC, that is the Nussela Mipi Free Council.
So that they will now recognize my certificates and they'll see what course they can now send me to do. Adaptation course.
They sent me to do. So they asked me, do you want to practice the Nussela Mipi? I said, it's made with me. It's made with me, I prefer.
So made with me, they can take you to work if you haven't got the myceliary experience.
And if for you to have that myceliary experience, you have to do six months course. And then you'll be subjected to do the myceliary under supervision.
So I have to do one year training, first six months and the second six months. At the first six months, I took an exam.
And then I got through and then did the second one. But unfortunately for me, before I started the training, I got married.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. That's in London. I got married. So I was able to do the first six months. Then I went to have my baby.
After having my baby, I went back again to do the second one. So I was after I qualified then I was recognized to practice as a midwife.
Then in the process of the hospital doing all that and I finished, then they now wrote to the NMC, the Nussela Midwifery Council, that being that I've done very well, that they should now recognize my still have training.
So that's what I did. So I was recognized and they gave me my certificate to practice both Nussela Midwifery.
So that's how I was. I had my first child and then I think after three years, I had the second one.
Yeah, and my husband was still a student then because he was studying accountancy, ACCA. So I was a student, he was a student as well.
So we all worked together and then he qualified as a midwife and accountant. Then from there I did all the other, you know, many other trainings like family planning, clinical instructors course.
And later on I was given an admission to go and do tutorial, tutorial to be a lecturer in Nussela Midwifery. So I got the admission in Sitco Hospital in Kent.
But unfortunately my husband left, has left UK to go home because he was the first son of his dad and his dad was very ill.
So he went home and left me and the children here so I couldn't do the course, the tutorial. So I was working, working as a midwife.
And then when he finished, he qualified, he left and then I went back again with my children, back to Nigeria. Yeah, I went back to Nigeria with my husband and my children.
Then I have to now work. Then I was with my clinical instructors course that I did. I have to be a clinical instructor back home, teaching in the Lawson School.
And then later on I went to do my diploma back home. To do that training that I'm supposed to do here, I have to do it back home in the uni.
So I was a lecturer throughout in the School of Nursing. Yeah, and then I worked for a long time here. I worked about six years before we went back home.
And then after six years, I spent about 20 years back home as a lecturer and then I came back again. And then I came back here again and then I continued doing so.
So I started from cradle and then when I came here, they wanted me to continue here to lecture. I said, I've had enough of lecturing. So I decided to go to old people's home.
And then that's where I switched over to end of life that is old care. So that training I didn't go there. When I went back home, I went to the university to do that training.
And that qualified me to be teaching as a lecturer in the School of Midwifery and Nursing. And then after five, after about ten years of that training, I have to go in for in-service training in the university again to do a diploma in advanced administration.
So to be a director, assistant director of nursing. So that was where I started.
Wow.
Yeah, so when I finished there now, I had my niece, all my children have grown now. They've all gone to university. So my husband had his accounting firm and working as a director in his own firm.
So that was he was doing that and I was teaching as well. So we had but we lived in the north, in the northern part of Nigeria, not in my state.
Okay.
Open the notes, right? So when when when did Newport come into the equation because you're living in London up until your qualifications and then going back home.
So when did you when the Newport come in?
Yeah, the Newport came in when I finished, I would say, in the north because I'm a Christian and I didn't come from the north because I have done all those courses and I'm qualified to be a director in the nursing.
So they said no, because I'm not an indigent, I should go back to my state. So I was disrupted from my service. It's sort of forced, forced retirement to say because I'm a Christian, I'm not a Muslim.
So I was sent back to my state. But that aspect, I finished my university administration, administrative course. Because when I come back after the training, I will be promoted to director.
So they said no, because we are not from that state. They won't give me that. So I was retired immediately. And when they retired me, of course, my children, they are all in the university. My husband still has his job.
So my niece had an accident and had an operation and it was so he had some surgery to be done, which they couldn't do. So I was able to and she usually she usually comes here on holidays and go back.
So and then she just got the if it's a to come on holidays when she had the accident. So I have to now accompany her for treatment here. And then I came back with her.
And when I came back after her treatment, she now left and I stayed back in my in my brother's house in my second brother's house, because the first one I stayed with passed away.
Yeah, I stay with when he came home and the wife, the wife and children that's here in Bournemouth. So my second brother was here. He's still here. So I have to come back with my niece and we stayed with my brother.
So when she now got recovered, she went back. I stayed back. So I stayed back in London and I was working in London. So as I was working in London, I felt London is too hectic.
I was there working. So I decided I said I want to live London. So there was an agency I met and then they gave me they gave me a job in Bristol.
And when I went to Bristol, the the home they got for me, they said they don't have a vacancy for registered nurse. They only want care assistants.
But I said to them I qualified in this country so I cannot go back and start doing care. This is my first time. So they found me and then they now brought me to their home here in Newport.
Instead of me staying in Bristol, they brought me to Newport to work. And that's how I've been in Newport because Newport is quiet and it's just what I wanted to continue.
So my career was my my utmost pursuit to everything I was doing right from home and here. So my career was the sort of bedrock for me and it's the masterpiece for me as well.
And that's what I've continued to do until date.
What year is this as well? In Newport?
In Newport. When I came to Newport it was, I came in in September 1999. But I started working here in Newport 2000, the year 2000.
That's when I started working in Newport.
And what do you remember or recall about the first kind of months that you were inside of Newport? Because you said it was quiet.
Yeah, it was quiet. It's not because I grew up in a town that is a hostel, busy town. The night I lived was another busy in Karno, right up, very busy, hectic town.
So I've been living in townships, very busy places. And I came back here and I lived in London and it was too much for me.
You go to work in the morning, by the time you finish work and get home, and then you can't have enough sleep. Only four hours or less and six hours sleep you're going back to work again.
So I felt it would take a big toll on me. So I decided I left my brother. I found my way here. My brother said to me, how can you go to Newport when you don't know anybody?
I said, but people are living there. But fortunately the people that gave me the job, they assisted me, got a place for me, the flats.
They were able to house me and help me to settle down in the accommodation and everything. If I was able to live on my own I would start doing things on my own.
But I think, as I said, that nursing was my bedrock and my masterpiece. It pulled me through. And then of course my progress was also boosted by my own, the way I took nursing and the way I mastered it up to that level.
So I think that was why I was taking the jobs like that. My profession was what really elated me and then put me into this job.
Do you feel like there were any challenges as well then? Coming to Newport and then leaving after that?
The challenges are the same because of colour. You don't get anything so good if you're not an indigene of any place.
I was treated as a non-indigene in my own country. That was my sad experience. And when I came here, that treatment they gave me didn't measure as much as what I was given in my own country when I was retired.
I was treated as an indigene instantly because I'm not an indigene of that place. You understand?
When I came here, that level of experience I had, it was nothing to me here. Whatever they were doing, just because of my experience, I ignored them.
I just faced my work, did my own thing and that's it. I kept my own pace, my own space and that's it.
So, when that abuse was there, I didn't want to take it because I've taken a heavier one, which I never expected.
Because of my religion and because of my dialect, I wasn't given the job I was supposed to be given and I was laid off because of that.
So, coming to a strange place, there's nothing they can do for me that can weigh to that experience. And that is what really gave me the strong man to withstand the abuse.
Yeah, yeah.
That makes sense. It's that resilience. I think you already spoke about alien run anyway, that you were learning from the household and your environment about being able to persevere and pass through.
And then as you've shared as well, gone through your work and you've been qualified and all of that upskilling, it showed your resilience.
Did any of your friends join here in Newport or family or was it a visit?
I had a friend that lived in London. So, she had a friend who came all the way from Nigeria and was looking for a place.
So, that's my friend. I sent her to me to help her to find a job here. So, fortunately, we were able to take her. So, we were living together.
Yeah, yeah. So, we lived together and then we did things commonly. But when I was living here, I was on my own. So, I normally go weekends to my brothers in London to stay with them.
So, they were my closest friends and family that I had.
What do you miss most about your country? What about Nigeria?
My relatives, my siblings, my siblings and then of course, the life there too. It's quite easy. Even though it's busy, it's quite easy to live in your own country.
Because a place that hasn't got a lot of that like here, you live at your own little space. As long as you know what you're doing and you have something in your hand that is in terms of profession or work.
So, you fit in anywhere. And the profession I had, I said, you fit in anywhere you go. You fit in anywhere you go and it's the same. So, that was what really made me to adjust to this country.
So, that's what you would say you love the most as well or say something else you'd say you love the most?
I don't.
Is that what you would also say that you love the most about your country?
My country?
Yeah.
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. It is because my twin sister was there. So, I usually go home every year. I go home every year to see my twin sister, my older sister and then my children, two were there and two were here.
The two I had here, the girl got married, you know, lived in South Africa with the husband. They have been, you know, living in the Arab country working because the husband is working in the oil sector.
And the other two, they are twins. I have twins, the boy and the girl. So, the two of them, they were back home. I have to bring them here to do their postgraduate course. So, they came and lived with me.
The postgraduate, the girl got married, went back home. Then the boy said he's not staying, he has to go home and stay with his sister. So, both of them stayed there.
Now, the boy is back here again with the wife. They are staying with me since I lost my husband. So, we are just, you know, and then my eldest daughter is here as well.
She's living with her children, but her two boys, they just left home now. They've got their jobs and they are all out. One did the biophysics like the father and then the other one did the cyber computer.
So, they are all working in their respective jobs. The other one is there now. He's working in the region.
We are going back from Scotland and the high seas there, so that's where he goes. And the other one is here, he's a cyber computer taster.
It sounds as if, as you speak, it sounds as if you have naturally preserved your culture. And it sounds, because you are, like you said, seeing your sister go in there, your children go in there, it maintains that connection.
Is there other elements that you would say that you have made an effort to make sure that you are remembering the clans, remembering where you come from, remembering the traditions and things like that?
I do, I do, because my senior sister and my twin sister, they kept me updated and they kept on saying, I go home now, spend my holidays, come back.
Then my twin sister also comes and goes as well, but I lost her six months ago. So, I have always kept that tradition. I even had a title back home.
Title, yeah, chieftaincy title back home. I'm much over there and much over here as well.
Wow, strong reflection, strong reflection of you of course.
We have an organization, my people back home, we have our meetings here in London, our organization here, so we do have meetings in London. So, we still keep to our tradition.
Why, why, why do you do that? Why?
Why?
Why? Yeah, so that I will still be remembering home. I will still have connection of my roots. Yeah, I still have to. Yeah, I still have to.
Yeah, because my siblings are there, so I still have to be connected. I know I'm a citizen here, I'm a British citizen, and I'm also in Nigeria, but my roots, I don't want to let go or leave it. That's why I go home and come back from time to time.
And also, in this section, why is that important for the children, the next generation? Why is that also important?
Why is that important?
Yeah, why? How and why?
Yeah, it should be because parents need to, to, you know, sort of bond their children with their children, and the bonding is not only just, oh yes, we are, you know, mother and child also. We must also make the child to know that this is their roots, where they come from.
And most of my children, and even all my grandchildren, they move back home. They bring home and come back. When we go on holidays, we take them and bring them back. So they all know, the grandchildren, especially my children, when I took them home, and they, the school that home, they did their university, their first degrees over there, and then they still come here to do their post-graduates.
Yeah, so they have the same roots I channeled them to. So they have the roots and they have their education.
Yeah, thank you. Thank you so much for sharing all of this as well. Really, really appreciate it. Just hearing about it. Where does Age Alive come into, when, when, when it's in your timeline, when they come?
Yeah, Age Alive is, you know, I will say, Age Alive comes, you know, I belong to the church, St. Mary's Church, where Age Alive do have their activities. So because I am a member of that church, and they are, you know, volunteering that church, I happen to see them doing the activities in our
institute. So that's how I wanted to say, okay, and then I was living alone here. My husband was back home. So I would say it's loneliness, but interaction with people. And that's how I joined Age Alive.
Yeah, to interact with different people.
And what has been your involvement, your individual involvement as well as anything that you do specific to?
Yeah, Age Alive, I've been with them since 2000, I don't remember. I joined them in 2005 or 2006 or so. I can't remember, but we did that together.
Yeah, and I've been joining them in everything they do, taking part in everything. They are present, you know, well, because of the way I've been active with them, and I've been, I've been long with them as well. So I'm one of the members of the committee. That is Age Alive.
What does Age Alive mean to you today?
Age Alive, what it means to me is that it has actually helped me to sort of mix with different, you know, different people from different backgrounds. And then to know different background of people.
I would say, especially with their religious cremations, when I lived in the North, I lived with the Muslims. So when I came and I saw they are Muslims as well, so the knowledge I have about the Muslims and the way I've lived with them is just always the same.
So whatever they do, I can tolerate it because I've tolerated from the root, from my roots. I have tolerated and I've been with them and I lived in the same compound with them because I lived in the school quarters where the school is, you know.
And I was given my own house there in the school and I was, I was a vice principal and I was, I paid so much role in the administrative work in terms of staff management, you know, organizations and examinations, national examinations and so many things.
So that's why I was able to get them in as much as joining them. When I joined, the level of the people I met there wasn't what I expected, but at least you have met people, you have to interact with people regardless of their status.
We are still a human being like them. So I didn't want to say no more because I'm, you know, I'm this I have, I won't go there. So I was able to, you know, remain there.
I find it a quiet, friendly, caring and very transparent human being as I can say. So they are quiet, you know. For me, I don't like crowded places.
And I know I choose my friends. I choose my friends. I don't go out anyhow.
Makes sense, makes sense. You're talking about places. Is there, is there one place in your time of your age of life that comes straight into your head when you think about age of life?
Well, the reason why, you know, I mean, I have, I, well, we like things because I've met people of my own age there. I know many people who are of the same age, age mates.
And they are one or two. They are also in my profession. So when you see people of the same, you know, caliber that you are, then you fit in as well.
And that made me to, you know, feel that these are the people and all of us are foreigners. So you gain from them because when you tolerate them, you gain.
You gain from them and because most of them, some of them were born here and some of them have lived for about 50 years here. So it's a medium of, you know, good interaction and experiences and knowledge as well.
I agree. I agree. Just on the closing section now, just to bring this slightly back onto the family. Is there any family heirlooms or ornaments that you have kept? Are there any kind of family ornaments or heirlooms?
Not quite. You mean that like, example?
It could be photographs. Important things are important. It could be photographs or if there was an emblem or a medal or something like that or a description.
Unfortunately, as I said, most of my childhood rough bringing and when I was doing my nursing and everything, I lost most of them during the war.
The war in my country because I did not bring anything out from there at all. My childhood, everything, you know, it's not there. It's not there. Whatever I have is what I've been taking from, you know, as I go along.
Well, it's only in my traditional pictures that I have when I took the title back home. That's the only thing I have. I can say, you know, because that was after the war and I've been here and then went back home to the side. So that's the only thing I can say I have.
But childhood and I lost most of them during the war.
Okay. Well, thank you. Thank you very much for sharing absolutely everything you have and to hear your incredible story.
Well, you give your stories of how you find yourself and how you've been carrying yourself all these years.
Well, I think the major basis, the foundation, the foundation is what makes people what they are. Foundation and then the upbringing and then your voyage, the voyage you have moved. So these are the things that make the life of everybody.
So that's why it is.
And I've met, I have, I've met so many friends from your place.
I have some background friends as well.
Agnes Whitman.
I have a friend who is a game, Motali Small.
Robert Small.
Robert Small, I think I've, he must have come at the same time when I came down to Newport.
Because I always meet him, you know, he was the first black person I was meeting when I first came to Newport.
I met him, you know, we pass and say hello at that time, you know.
So these days he says, how you're still there? I said yes, yes.
And then one Brian, Brian, he's in Cardiff.
Okay, used to be, used to be in Newport.
Yeah, no, he was, I joined the retired elders in Cardiff.
Then I told him about 50 plus, so he was coming from Cardiff to join us.
Yeah, he says in Birmingham.
Yeah, because of transportation and everything, he said it's too much for him.
So he doesn't come again.
So we meet in the Cardiff group, elders group, because I belong to different groups.
50 plus, elders group.